### The Balance Sheet

The balance sheet summarizes what a company owns and what it owes on a specific date. What the company owns are known as assets. Examples are cash, inventories, machines, equipment, and properties. What it owes are known as liabilities. Examples include bank loans, accounts payable, accrued expenses, and long-term debt. The difference between the two is the owners’ or shareholders’ equity. The balance sheet has two sections: Assets and Liabilities & Shareholders’ equity. Assets are listed first, in the order of their liquidity (i.e., how easily they can be converted into cash at or near their intrinsic value). Liabilities are listed next, in the order of their maturity (i.e., how soon the company must pay them). Shareholders’ equity is listed last. This represents the total investment of owners in the company, stated on an historical cost basis.

### The Income Statement

The income statement is a summary of a company’s revenues and expenses over a period, usually a year. It starts with the total revenue generated during the period and proceeds with deductions for the expenses incurred during the same period. The last line is the company’s net income for the period, that is, the difference between revenue and expenses for the period. This is the reason why the net income is sometimes referred to as the bottom line, and people often ask “What’s the bottom line?” when they want the major point or overall impact of something.

### The Statement of Cash Flow

This statement reports the impact of a company’s activities on its cash flows over a given period. Typically, the income statement and balance sheet are prepared following the conventions of accrual accounting. The main effect of this is that the profit reported on the income statement is not the additional net cash generated by the company during the year. The statement of cash flow reflects various adjustments to net profit as stated on the income statement to arrive at the net cash generated or used by the company during the year. Why is this important? The answer is simple—the main thing that matters in determining value is cash generated by the company, not its accounting profits. The two will generally be highly correlated, but it is quite possible for a profitable firm to be cash strapped.

### The Statement of Shareholders’ Equity

The statement of shareholders’ equity reports changes in the owners’ investment in the company. These changes typically arise because of retained earnings (net income not distributed to shareholders as dividends but ploughed back into the company’s business), stock repurchases, employee option exercises, and other equity adjustments.