I am very familiar with the new product introduction process. As an engineer in R&D this article describes pretty well the trials and tribulations of the process.

This team is unfortunately quite dysfunctional. Although the team was made of cross functional components, ultimately Valerie Mertz was not integrated in the slightest. This team falls in a number of places. Communication is clearly not happening effectively, and there are no systems in place to encourage sharing of information. This is an example of a blocking orientation, breaking the cohesiveness of the team. Despite the goal of cross-functionality, what we had was in fact a series of different functional groups all coming together without a project owner. Mertz saw herself as the chief due to her overseeing of P and L, but she ultimately she sits at the same level as the lead engineer on the project. Merz sees her responsibility as dealing with the product road map, with no authority to affect other teams meeting of those goals. While, it is true that the development timeline of the product affects timing of the system rollout and marketing efforts, she simply does not need to interface with engineering everyday. Her job is to advocate for voice of the customer, and make sure the designs are achieving those goals.

There were also many fundamental issues that were not adequately addressed throughout the development process. The first was the concept of modularity. It was determined that it was a very necessary thing, but engineering did not feel it was possible in the current constraints. despite this fact, the overall determination was _very_ clear to engineering, "engineering had no intention of developing these modules." [1] Merz, however saw the business case clearly, yet never forced Engineering to follow suit. This was mostly due to her lack of perceived power within the organization, and would've been remedied by either advocating for her to have a role that would have enough authority, or to simply talk to whomever had it. Bret O'Brien also lost dedicated engineering resources, and the organization did not allow him to staff up on this project, which probably informed the modularity discussions. Finally, Art Beaumont even noticed that they team was not working well together. Curiously, he chose not to intervene, citing the fact that he didn't want to make the team feel bad. This is a completely wrong way to look at things. It is far easier to get all stakeholders in the room and remind them what the ultimate goal is, not tell them they're not performing well. He has confused level of effort with effectiveness. Teams call all work very hard, but still not produce, which I believe was the case here.

If I were a consultant, the path forward is very clear to me. The leaders of each functional group need to develop shared goals. Currently they are all looking at the problem in a very containerized manner. In order to correctly address these issues, the goals should be more collaborative, with Marketing/Product heads all having the voice of the customer ring true, and deliver the best product in a timely manner. Since the functional leaders then have the same goal, the teams would feel both empowered and enabled. Causing the major players to align on goals and visions, the infighting and uncoordinated efforts would be eliminated, and all would be required to align to the same goal.

[1] Page 6 of Case Study