  

Use what you have learned to date to diagnose your manager/supervisor and your organization or a part of it. For example, you might diagnose your work group, your division, your entire company, etc. Your choice should be based on what you know the best and therefore will be able to do a more complete diagnosis. Strong answers will show familiarity with the concepts and theories as well as your ability to apply them.

1. How does your supervisor influence you and your colleagues? That is, what styles of influence and power does he/she typically use? Provide examples. How do you react to them?
2. How does your supervisor/company motivate you? What theories of motivation does he/she use—whether he/she knows it or not? More specifically, identify the two main theories of motivation used and discuss how well and why they motivate you. Be sure to provide an example of each theory in use. That is, what does your manager do and in what way is this an application of the theory of motivation? Finally, if you were your supervisor, how would you motivate you?
3. Apply the readings about groups and teams and diagnose your group at work. Specifically, identify two to three areas of strength that your group does well **and** two to three areas that need improvement. For example, you might say “We always get our work to our customers on time and/or we waste a lot of time deciding on the best of several alternatives. Then explain what accounts for each area—i.e., how come/why is it able to do well (or not) in these areas. For example, you might say that our goal is very clear (or not) or we (don’t) trust each other.
4. Now turn to your organizational culture. We want you to both describe it and analyze it. More specifically, use the framework, "Dimensions of Organizational Culture Profile," in the text to answer the following: Which three of the seven dimensions best describe the "core" of your company’s (or department's) culture? Be sure to use examples; i.e. point to specific behavior, measures, activities that illustrate each of the three dimensions.
    
    Then explain how your organization’s (or department's) culture—especially the three dimensions—helps and/or hinders its business performance. Be specific and use examples. (If you can’t/don’t illustrate the connection between your culture and results, you haven’t thought about it enough.)
    
      
    
    1.) My Supervisors influence techniques fall most closely in line with the following:
    
    **Coalition building**:
    
    It is not always easy to make sure that everyone is in agreement. In fact, it is quite common for people to hear the exact same thing, and have different takeaways as to what they heard. One of my supervisors strengths is that before the close out of every meeting he outlines succinctly what he thinks was the takeaway from the conversation, and makes sure that each stakeholder agrees before we adjourn.
    
    **Consultation**:
    
    My supervisor is the director of research and development for my division. This means that he is frequently in conversation with many different disciplines and levels of responsibility. He is also not a subject matter expert in any specific category. This means that he needs to get information from each person who best knows the product and incorporate their viewpoint and vision going forward.
    
    **Exchange**:
    
    Our company does not have enough staff to ensure a one-person one-product design cycle. This means that in order to take time from one employee, you must be pulling them away from another task. This frequently involves exchanging with project managers to ensure that the impact will be minimal if engineers get moved around.
    
    **Reason**:
    
    As the head of the R&D department, my boss deals with people from a variety of backgrounds. Mostly, he deals with engineers and scientists. These people, myself included, tend to be more persuaded by data and logic than emotions. This means that my supervisor is frequently pushing us to get data or review data, or look at a clearly rational path he has just laid out. This is very helpful, since it allows for us to reach alignment on a lot of subjects in a short timeframe.
    
      
    
    2.) There are two main methods of motivation that my supervisor uses. The first is a corporate program of performance appraisals which includes the setting of SMART goals.
    
    This method is a combination in itself of two separate ways to motivate, but my company combines them into one. Each year we sit down and discuss with our supervisor the path forward for the next year. This is usually done by discussing corporate goals, and the individuals role in hitting those goals. This is then directly translated to SMART goals, which we use to evaluate performance. In the same meeting as the forward looking goal setting process, we also discuss how well the prior years SMART goals were achieved. This results in a great one-on-one discussion with my supervisor which tends to have more feedback than the standard rating system would. This allows for me to have a greater understanding of how well I am doing outside of just SMART goals, and it is a highly effective process.
    
    The second method is through job design. In my first 4 months at my company, my supervisor was watching me and designing a role for me in the company. I am titled as a mechanical engineer in R&D, but he has had me working with advanced research groups, and doing electromechanical work because he noticed I had taken a liking to it. He has granted me a lot of autonomy, and allowed me to motivate myself. This has been an immensely freeing process, and I find myself significantly more motivated than I have been at other companies were work is purely just directed to me.
    
    If I were my supervisor, I would be following a similar approach. I am a naturally curious person, and I like to tinker and solve problems. By allowing me the freedom to find my own niche in advanced research, I am far more motivated to do good work, and I think that overall I am a better asset to the company while doing so.
    
    3.) For the sake of clarity, I am using the terms "group" and "team" in the following manner: based on our organizational structure, we are a group, in that we are all in R&D or Advanced R&D, but we are also all smaller teams built on a combination of the same players in the group. We are very much a cross-functional organization, with our end goal being product design and new product introduction. In any given week, I am a core team member in at least 4 meetings with various product development teams, one meeting with an advanced R&D team to discuss progress made on those projects, and a functional team meeting of just mechanical engineers. This layout highlights to me a couple areas of great success, but also some potential for improvement. Since most of these group meetings are with a variety of disciplines, each feeling empowered to speak their mind, we have normalized effective dialogue and people feel safe to speak their mind and concerns. We are collectively somewhere between pooled interdependence and outcome interdependence, since we are all responsible to our own disciplines, yet we also are creating a product together, and each decision ultimately leads to the finished product as our outcome.
    
    Another thing that we do well, is that we have a very well established method of conducting an R&D program which clearly defines each persons role going into the program. This allows for there to be a technical lead, which is very much a technical liaison acting as consul and coordinator for all technical aspects — leaving room for other engineers such as myself to be both contributor and cooperator— and a project manager who provides a clear coordinator and communicator role from a timeline and presentation standpoint to stakeholders. This allows for technical decisions to be motivated by, but not dictated by, schedule and ultimately empowers technical employees to make the best decisions they can.
    
    Fortunately, I have yet to experience this directly, but I know one of the major potential shortcomings of our technical lead role is the possibility of one person to dominate the decision making process. Since that person is empowered by the organization to lead the technical development, there is a chance that they would form a direction in their mind of how a product be designed, and then stop listening to feedback from others.
    
    Another opportunity for improvement within my various teams is that there is a risk of assumed communication. Specifically, since the teams are all from the same group, and constantly communicating about various projects, it is very easy to lose track of what has actually been communicated successfully. A lot of times people may simply think that they mentioned something in a meeting about one project, but they actually mentioned a similar point in a different meeting about a differing project. I don't think this is quite groupthink, but something closer to a decrease in collective efficacy, or even just simply over-cohesion. Overall, this group at my company is a highly functional, very effective group that is producing great products.
    
      
    
    4.) The three main organizational cultures that exist in my company are: an innovation culture, a people oriented culture, and a team-oriented culture. As an innovation culture, we are constantly developing new methods of improving the organization. For instance, we have a process called PPI (Practical Process Improvement) where the entire culture revolves around how to do something better, be it an internal process, or a tweak to a product that we decide to implement.
    
    From a people perspective, my company is very good at constantly helping employees learn and grow into their role. We have a lot of autonomy, and there are plenty of training programs and learning opportunities presented to us. With tuition-reimbursement, as well as access to health-care and other benefits, us employees are definitely treated extremely well.
    
    Finally, from a teams-oriented perspective, we are largely utilized as greater than the sum of our parts. Each employee is carefully vetted through our internal hiring processes, and interviewed by many different teams and disciplines. This greatly help us to make sure that we have a very cohesive group, so when are are ultimately pulled into various teams, we are all compatible. Each employee is also granted some autonomy in their role, and having each employee be compatible with most other people, each person is able to form their own cohorts, and develop products with some employees from very different backgrounds.
    
    Our culture is probably the greatest asset of my company. By having a group of employees always looking for process improvements with our PPI program, our whole company is now internally incredibly dynamic, and always improving. With this approach, as an organization, can respond faster to our customers, generate better products, and are structurally enabled to be better than our past selves. Each employee is empowered, and enabled to do the best they can, and are rewarded for it through generous bonus structures, and a variety of other benefits. The creative generation of teams has allowed for more viewpoints to be heard from in the product development process, allowing for each design to be more well-rounded. We are very much a scientific company, and truly put our customer first. Especially during the pandemic each employee has been focused on improving the lives of front line workers, and the rapid expansion of test methods, and solutions available globally.